© The National Medical Journal of India 2016
ABSTRACT
ORCID, the Open Researcher and Contributor ID, is a non-
profit, community-driven effort to create and maintain a
registry of unique researcher identifiers and a transparent
method of linking research activities and outputs to these
identifiers. Together with other persistent identifiers for
scholarly works such as digital object identifiers (DOIs) and
identifiers for organizations, ORCID makes research more
discoverable. It helps ensure that one’s grants, publications
and outputs are correctly attributed. It helps the research
community not just in aggregating publications, but in every
stage of research, viz. publishing, reviewing, profiling, metrics,
accessing and archiving. Funding agencies in Austria, Australia,
Denmark, Portugal, Sweden and the UK, and the world’s
leading scholarly publishers and associations have integrated
their systems with ORCID registry. Among the BRICS countries,
China and South Africa are adopting ORCID avidly. India is
yet to make a beginning. If research councils and funding
agencies in India require researchers to adopt ORCID and link
ORCID iDs to funding as well as tracking performance, it will
help them keep track of the workflow. Journal editors can also
keep track of contributions made by different authors and
work assigned to different reviewers through their ORCID iDs.
Natl Med J India 2016;29:e1–e8
INTRODUCTION
Names in scholarly publishing are not all that simple. Names here
mean both names of authors of papers and names of researchers
referred to in those papers. They can cause much confusion to
researchers, editors of journals, database producers, librarians
and bibliometricists, but if we handle them correctly we can
overcome most of the problems.
SCHOLARLY LITERATURE: DISAMBIGUATION OF
NAMES AND AGGREGATING ONE’S WORKS
As early as 1969, Eugene Garfield had expressed his dismay at the
‘needless ambiguity and confusion’ caused by authors who omit
parts of their names and initials in their published works, and
recommended that ‘scientists who are just now embarking on
their careers would be well advised to measure the information
content on their names as they appear in indexes such as Index
Medicus, Physics Abstracts, Biological Abstracts and Science
Citation Index.’ 1 Some 12 years later, he wrote a detailed paper on
the problems the scholarly world faces on account of mere names
of people. 2 He had reasons to worry more than anyone else; as the
publisher of Science Citation Index, Current Contents and several
other search and indexing tools for the world’s scientists and
scholars, he had the unenviable task of processing millions of
papers and author names not only in the byline of these papers but
also in the references cited in them and rendering these author
names accurately and attributing research papers to the right
authors and institutions within a few weeks of publication.
People hail from all parts of the world and from different
cultures, each having its own peculiarities in naming their people
so much so people from one culture may find names of another
strange. Added to that are the ways names from different cultures
and languages are transliterated into the Roman script. The names
in most parts of the western world have three parts, viz. the first
name (or given name), middle name and last name (also called the
family name or surname). Often the last name may have more than
one word, e.g. Duncan Smith, von Braun, van der Waals, de Solla
Price. The prefix ‘van’ in some names may be spelt with a capital
V, albeit rarely, e.g. Van de Graaff (of generator fame). In some
cultures there are a very large number of people having the same
surname. For example, close to 85% of China’s population have
one of only 129 surnames, and three names in particular, viz.
Wang, Li and Chen, are predominant among authors publishing
currently. Also there are two Chinese surnames that can be spelt
as Wang when publishing in English language, says Jane Qiu.3
Eight Chinese names transliterate in Roman script into Wei Wang
and to avoid ambiguity in such cases journals may allow authors
the option to include their names in their own language in
parentheses after the transliterated name. 4 Among Korean authors,
Kim and Park account for a large percentage. In India there are
many Agarwals, Guptas, Mukherjees, Raos, Sharmas and Singhs
among publishing authors. While some Indians have two-part
surnames, e.g. Ghosh Dastidar, Guha Thakurta and Sen Sharma,
a few drop their initials altogether, e.g. Karmeshu.
Some have hyphenated names, e.g. Noel-Baker, Szent-Györgyi,
Julius Wagner-Jauregg, all three Nobel laureates. Curiously,
Noel-Baker was born Philip Baker, but took Noel as his second
surname on marriage to Irene Noel and subsequently started
hyphenating his surname. But in the majority of cases hyphenated
names are those of women who add their husband’s family name
Adopting ORCID as a unique identifier will benefit all involved
in scholarly communication
SUBBIAH ARUNACHALAM, MUTHU MADHAN
———————————————————————————————
Centre for Internet & Society, Bengaluru, India, and DST Centre for Policy
Research, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 560012, Karnataka, India
SUBBIAH ARUNACHALAM subbiah.arunachalam@gmail.com, http://
orcid.org/0000-0002-4398-4658
··············································································································································
Learning Resource Centre, Indian School of Business, Hyderabad 500032,
Telangana, India, and DST Centre for Policy Research, Indian Institute
of Science, Bengaluru 560012, Karnataka, India
MUTHU MADHAN mu.madhan@gmail.com, http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1651-4180
··············································································································································
Correspondence to SUBBIAH ARUNACHALAM
Speaking for Ourselves
THE NATIONAL MEDICAL JOURNAL OF INDIA VOL. 29 , NO . 4 , 2016 e1
[Downloaded free from http://www.nmji.in on Thursday, October 20, 2016, IP: 202.174.120.125]
e2 THE NATIONAL MEDICAL JOURNAL OF INDIA VOL . 29 , NO . 4 , 2016
to their own, e.g. Françoise Barré-Sinoussi, Rita Levi-Montalcini,
both of whom won Nobel Prizes for medicine, and Irene Joliot-
Curie, who won a Nobel Prize for chemistry. In a variation, Marie
Curie, née Sklodowska, who won Nobel Prizes in both physics
and chemistry, used her husband’s name ahead of her maiden
name: Marie Curie, née Sklodowska. Some examples from among
Fellows of the Indian Academy of Sciences and the Indian
National Science Academy: mathematician Rajinder Jeet Hans-
Gill, photochemist Krishna Kamini Rohatgi-Mukherjee, plant
physiologist Renu Khanna-Chopra, condensed matter physicist
Tanusri Saha-Dasgupta, development biologist Professor
Priyambada Mohanty-Hejmadi, conservation biologist Professor
Asha Chandola-Saklani, and neurophysiologist Professor Sushil
Dua-Sharma. Many of these women scientists have published
papers both under their maiden names and under their hyphenated
family names.
In Japan, married couples are required by a 1898 law, which is
valid till date, to have the same surname, even though giving up
one’s maiden name does disadvantage women in certain ways,
including professionally.5
Both retaining one’s maiden name and adopting the husband’s
surname have their advantages. If one achieves a lot as a young
person, one would be better off retaining the name that brought
her the reputation in the first place. If one achieves much after
taking her husband’s name, she will have much to lose if she ever
gets a divorce. Better to hold on to one’s maiden name, says
Kalpana Sharma.6 Some professionals, e.g. Bhatnagar award
winner and fluid flows expert Professor Rama Govindarajan, has
chosen this option. The situation is changing in India albeit
slowly. A woman in Maharashtra can now use either her father’s
or husband’s names in all official documents.
There are also rare instances of people changing their names
midway in their career, e.g. a woman electrical engineer of Indian
origin working in the University of Waterloo has over the years
published under three different names, viz. K.H. Sheshakamal,
Shesha Jayaram, Shesha H. Jayaram (personal communication,
Muthanna J, 23 Dec 2015).
Missing middle name in the byline, spelling mistakes and
problems faced in printing (or processing by computers) texts
with diacritical marks can all lead to ambiguity. But with all these
vagaries, it is important that contributions such as papers, patents,
datasets and software are attributed to the right contributors.
Many researchers have recognized the problem of author name
disambiguation. A Scopus search (on 28 June 2015) using the key
words ‘author name’ and ‘disambiguation’ led to 86 papers in the
13-year period 2003–2015. Of these, 46 had the keywords in the
title. Some of these papers were related to the problems faced by
biomedical databases, e.g.
1. Author Name Disambiguation for PubMed, http://online
library.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/asi.23063/pdf
2. Author Name Disambiguation in MEDLINE, http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2805000
From 2012 onwards PubMed uses a ranking algorithm for
author searches to show more relevant results by disambiguating
common author names. 7 This helps pooling papers by the real
A.K. Sen when there are papers by others with the same name and
initials.
The name ambiguity problem can only be solved collaboratively,
when all stakeholders agree on a standard identification scheme.
Rachel Bruce, deputy chief innovation officer, Joint Information
Systems Committee (Jisc), UK, says that our inability to associate
valuable research outputs with their right authors ‘has led to
extremely inefficient research management and difficulty in
identifying what has been produced. Ineffective reporting and
sharing of research impact on both individual researcher’s and
universities’ profiles.’ According to her, ‘wider adoption and use
of Open Researcher and Contributor ID (ORCID)’ is the solution
to this problem. 8
WHAT IS ORCID?
A person’s ORCID iD takes the form of a unique 16-digit number,
e.g. 0000-0000-0000-0000. ORCID also gives each person a web
page profile based on the iD, e.g. http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4398-4658, listing their iD number, name(s), institution(s) and
publications. (Generally ORCID is used for the organization and
the registry, and ORCID iD to denote the identifier itself.)
Publications here go beyond research publications such as journal
articles, conference papers, dissertations, reports, research
techniques, software and inventions to include books, lectures/
speeches, websites, etc.
These profiles or records together comprise the ORCID registry.
This registry of unique researcher identifiers and a transparent
method of linking research activities and outputs to these identifiers
(http://orcid.org/node/47) is created and maintained by an open,
non-profit, community-driven effort. ORCID iDs help distinguish
individuals with common names, and they are not affected by
changes in name or name order or alphabet in which the name is
rendered. ORCID is researcher-controlled; the researcher decides
what information is included in her ORCID record.
ORCID iDs can be embedded in research workflows. If included
by the publisher or funding agency, they are part of the metadata
associated with scholarly works and grants. Together with other
persistent identifiers for scholarly works such as DOIs and
identifiers for organizations, ORCID makes research more
discoverable.
But ORCID is not the first such attempt to associate
unambiguously research papers (and other output such as datasets
and software) with the right authors. Fenner has listed a number
of them. 9 Some of these cover only specific fields. Some are
country specific. Some are proprietary. Some are linked to specific
databases while others want to cover a wide area of science and
scholarship. Fenner’s list includes RePEc Author (set up by
Thomas Krichel in 1999), LATTES (an information platform
mandatory for researchers in Brazil, set up by the National
Council of Scientific and Technological Development or CNPq,
in 1999), VIAF (set up by OCLC in 2003), NARCIS (set up in
2004 by the Royal Academy of Sciences of the Netherlands and
mandatory for all researchers in the Netherlands), arXiv Author
ID (set up in 2005 by Cornell University for researchers in physics
and related disciplines), Scopus Author ID (set up in 2006 by
Elsevier), Names Project Mimas (set up in 2007 by the British
Library for authors and institutions in all academic disciplines),
Researcher ID (set up in 2008 by Thomson Reuters) and Author
Claim (set up by Thomas Krichel in 2008).
If there are many author identity services already available, why
add ORCID, one may ask. The other services are not truly
interoperable, whereas ORCID allows linkage to other identifiers
such as Scopus ID and Researcher ID. ORCID is the only service
trying to associate its identifier with other existing author identifiers,
with more than publications, and to collaborate across the community
to embed it at the time that a work is ‘released’ by a researcher. Also,
most other services are linked to a single bibliographic database
(e.g. Researcher ID is linked to Web of Science).
[Downloaded free from http://www.nmji.in on Thursday, October 20, 2016, IP: 202.174.120.125]
SPEAKING FOR OURSELVES e3
‘Thus, since none of the available author identifier services
looked like the solution to the name ambiguity problem, the
ORCID initiative was started in late 2009 and formed as a non-
profit organization in August 2010.’ 10
Why should a researcher have an ORCID iD?
This section draws on information mainly from private
communication with the Executive Director and other staff of
ORCID and the Library Guide of the University of Southampton.11
ORCID helps ensure that one’s grants, publications and outputs
are correctly attributed. It is for life, irrespective of where one
chooses to live and work. Connections between the ORCID
registry and other databases help one to keep one’s research
profile updated and to make it visible worldwide. Authors with an
ORCID iD can have Crossref automatically push information
about their published work to their ORCID record.12
Often researchers waste much time in filling forms that require
address, employment history, collaborator names, affiliation, etc.
when applying for jobs, awards, academy fellowships or grants or
submitting manuscripts to journals. One can have all such
information in one’s ORCID profile and draw upon it at short
notice. Researchers can save much of their productive time by
linking their ORCID iDs to the grants or manuscript processing
systems.
As the Caltech Library Guide points out, as one collaborates
across disciplines, institutions and borders, one ‘must interact
with an increasing number and diversity of research information
systems. Entering data over and over again can be time-consuming,
and often frustrating’ (http://libguides.caltech.edu/orcid).
To obtain the list of publications of a researcher from a
database such as Web of Science, one would need to give the name
(with all variants), research domains and names of organizations
(with all their variants) associated with the author. With all that,
one may not get the full list. But if one uses the researcher’s
ORCID iD in the identifier field, the search will give the correct
list instantaneously.
Anstey, editor of the 125-year-old British Journal of
Dermatology, has explained lucidly why researchers, editors and
funders should embrace ORCID and how through ORCID iDs one
could connect to websites such as Web of Science, figshare,
Impactstory and others. 13
How do researchers get an ORCID iD?
Scientists, researchers, teachers, students, clinicians, scholars,
authors and anyone at all, contributing to scholarly outputs from
anywhere in the world can sign up for a free ORCID iD through
the ORCID website (https://orcid.org/register). It is also possible
to create an ID at other websites that are integrated with ORCID,
for example manuscript submission websites of journals. About
5000 journals, including those published by the Institute of
Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE), Taylor & Francis, and
Cambridge University Press, use ScholarOne developed by
Thomson Reuters and whenever one submits a paper to these
journals one is asked to provide an ORCID iD. And if you do not
have one you can create it through the publisher’s Application
Program Interface (API). Claiming an ORCID iD is not at all
difficult. After claiming, researchers can associate the ORCID
iDs with their education and employment details and details
related to collaborators, publications and outputs.
Including one’s publications is simple. One can import
bibliographic details of one’s publications having unique identifiers
(e.g. DOI, ISBN) from the list of databases integrated with
ORCID registry. The list includes Scopus, Web of Science, Europe
PubMed Central, Crossref Metadata Search, Redalyc, etc.14 One
can just log in to ORCID and choose the database from which one
wants to import bibliographic data. For publications that are not
indexed by the databases integrated with ORCID, one can use the
template provided by ORCID to manually add details. Also
ORCID has created a tool by which one can import bibliographic
data from BibTeX (.bib) files into one’s ORCID record, including
files exported from Google Scholar and other popular reference
management tools. 15
Is one’s ORCID private information?
Of course, one can choose which information to be assigned as
public or private in one’s record except the actual iDs assigned by
ORCID that are designed to be publicly available. Once researchers
have claimed their ORCID iD, the settings are in their sole control.
ORCID has a privacy selector option that lets one set the privacy
level of all new works, education, employment and funding items.
Usually, everyone makes the list of publications public.
ORCID features
ORCID offers its essential features for free to individual researchers
and organizations across the world. Researchers would be able to
automatically update their ORCID record with links to published
manuscripts in which they have included their ORCID iD.
However, ORCID charges membership fees from organizations
such as publishers, funders, and academic and research institutions,
in order to sustain the registry and the mission to achieve name
disambiguation, and in return offers them premium API services
and personalized technical support. Also, when many organizations
join as a consortium, they benefit from reduced ORCID
membership costs and enhanced technical support.
ORCID conforms to the values of an open scholarly
infrastructure organization. 16 Indeed, Public Knowledge Project
(PKP) Director John Willinsky considers ORCID ‘an important
emerging technology with opportunities to help shape and improve
the open access publishing landscape worldwide’.17 Organizations
can integrate ORCID iDs into research management systems and
workflows using the free public API. ORCID releases a public
data file annually under Creative Commons License (CC0 1.0
Public Domain Dedication) to support broad access to data that
are made public by individual researchers through their ORCID
records. The file contains the public information associated with
each user’s ORCID record. Each record is included as a separate
file in both JSON and XML formats (http://orcid.org/content/
orcid-public-data-file-2014).
ORCID helps institutions track one’s work, compile information
for university-level reporting (including total funding received by
its scholars), and more efficiently manage information on faculty
profiles. By eliminating redundancies and automating some
reporting functions, ORCID will be especially helpful in reducing
time and monies spent on other assessment activities such as the
Research Excellence Framework (REF) in the UK. 18
Feedback from a pilot study with eight UK universities showed
that organizations that have adopted ORCID were likely to see
‘measurable efficiency improvements within two years of
implementation—especially in internal data quality, streamlining
of publications management, and enhanced reporting to funders—
with accrued benefits increasing steadily over the following three
to four years.’ 19
[Downloaded free from http://www.nmji.in on Thursday, October 20, 2016, IP: 202.174.120.125]
e4 THE NATIONAL MEDICAL JOURNAL OF INDIA VOL . 29 , NO . 4 , 2016
Uptake of ORCID
The number of live ORCID iDs grew rapidly from late 2012 (Fig.
1) and as of 29 July 2016, it exceeded 2.43 million. These are
currently used by more than 200 research and workflow platforms
at academic and other research institutions, at funding agencies
and at publishers.
As of mid-December 2015, more than 350 organizations have
opted for ORCID’s member services and are at different stages of
integrating ORCID iDs into their systems and workflows (Miyairi
N, personal communication, 18 Dec 2015). As of 30 September
2015, 65% of ORCID members were universities (Fig. 2) spread
all over the globe (Fig. 3). A representative list of different
categories of members is provided in Box 1. The large European
contingent is a result of three national consortia. These proportions
are expected to be fluid over the next couple of years as more
consortia are formed and join ORCID (Haak LL, personal
communication, 30 Sep 2015).
Recognizing that publishers can promote systems that would
provide support to researchers and to science, commencing January
2016, eight publishers will be requiring the use of ORCID iDs by
corresponding authors during the publication process. These
include the American Association for Advancement of Science
(AAAS; publishers of Science), American Geophysical Union
(AGU), eLife, EMBO, Hindawi, IEEE, the Public Library of
Box 1. Uptake of ORCID
Among the long list of members of ORCID are:
Publishers: AIP Publishing, Elsevier, National Academy
of Sciences (USA), Oxford University Press, Public Library
of Science (PLoS), Science Open, Springer, Taylor &
Francis, Wiley, Wolters Kluwer
Associations: American Association for Advancement
of Science (AAAS), American Astronomical Society,
American Chemical Society, American Psychological
Association, American Physical Society, American Society
of Microbiology, American Society of Civil Engineers,
Association of Computing Machinery, Electrochemical
Society, Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers
(IEEE), IOP, Modern Language Association, Royal Society
of Chemistry
Universities: Harvard University, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Caltech, Cornell University, Lund University,
Stockholm University, City University of Hong Kong,
National Taiwan University, CINECA, Italy’s consortium of
70 universities and four research institutes
Academies: African Academy of Science, Chinese
Academy of Science, Royal Society
Funding agencies: National Institutes of Health (USA),
Department of Energy (USA), Wellcome Trust (UK),
National Institute for Health Research (UK), Fundação
para a Ciência e a Tecnologia (Portugal)
Intergovernmental bodies: CABI, CERN, International
Food Policy Research Institute, International Water
Management Institute
Libraries: British Library, Royal Library – Denmark
Repositories: Social Science Research Network (SSRN)
For the full list of members, see
http://orcid.org/about/
community/members
F IG 1. Growth of ORCID iDs (http://support.orcid.org/
knowledgebase/articles/150557-number-of-orcid-ids)
No. of ORCID iDs
Millions
Jan Jan Jan Jan
2013 2014 2015 2016
Year
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
F IG 2. Sectoral distribution of ORCID members (Haak LL,
personal communication, 30 Sep 2015)
Associations, 7%
Repositories,
10%
Publishers,
13% Research
institutes,
65%
Funders, 5%
F IG 3. Geographical distribution of ORCID members (Haak LL,
personal communication, 30 Sep 2015)
Middle East and
Africa, 2% South America, 1%
Europe, 53%
Australasia, 6%
Asia, 8%
North
America,
30%
[Downloaded free from http://www.nmji.in on Thursday, October 20, 2016, IP: 202.174.120.125]
SPEAKING FOR OURSELVES e5
Science (PLoS), and the Royal Society. More than 3000 journals are
already collecting ORCID iDs from corresponding authors. Currently
about 75% of all registrations are through journal accounts.
Similarly, six consortia too will require the use of ORCID iDs.
These are: Jisc (50 universities and research councils, UK), Italy/
ANVUR (70+ universities and research institutes), Australia, via
the Australian Access Federation (40 universities, research
institutes, and Australian Research Council and National Health
and Medical Research Council funders), and three library consortia
in the US: Committee on Institutional Cooperation (CIC) consisting
of 15 universities in the US midwest, the Greater Western Library
Alliance (GWLA), a consortium of 35 research libraries located
in the central and western US, and the North East Research
Libraries Consortium (NERL) comprising 29 core member
academic research libraries and approximately 90 affiliate member
academic and/or research libraries.
Jisc negotiated an ORCID consortium through which
universities would benefit from premium ORCID membership at
significantly reduced costs. The official launch event for the
consortium took place at Imperial College in late September 2015
with the participation of more than 50 UK universities, ORCID,
Jisc, GuildHE, RCUK and Current Research Information System
(CRIS) vendors.20 Since August 2015, the Wellcome Trust has
required all lead applicants for grants to provide an ORCID iD. 21
From 23 September 2015, an ORCID iD has become mandatory
for all new National Institute of Health Research (NIHR, UK)
personal award applications. 22
Italy has implemented ORCID on a national scale, and has
signed a three-year consortium membership agreement with
ORCID. Under the auspices of ANVUR (National Agency for the
Evaluation of the University and Research Systems) and CRUI
(the Conference of Italian University Rectors), 70 universities and
four research centres initially participate in the consortium (Cineca).
ANVUR made ORCID mandatory in order to participate in the
National Assessment from November 2015. 23 The Italians expect
that at least 80% of Italian researchers will have an ORCID iD,
with links to their research output by the end of 2016. 23
ORCID is now included in the Danish National Open Access
Strategy and the National Research Data Strategy. The Danish
Council for Independent Research recommends, and the Novo
Nordisk foundation requires an ORCID iD in funding applications.
Currently DEFF, a library collaboration funded by several
ministries, is sponsoring a national ORCID implementation project
with project partners including seven of the eight Danish
universities, a consortium of all Danish university colleges and a
consortium of research institutions under the Ministry of Culture.24
In Australia, according to Arthur Sale of the University of
Tasmania, ‘there is an active ORCID activity, and it has been
adopted (or recommended) for universal application, but this has
not yet reached the status of a mandate by government’ (personal
communication, 2 Jan 2016). The Australian ORCID Consortium
was launched on 1 January 2016 with 38 organizations (http://
aaf.edu.au/orcid/). The Universities of Sydney, Melbourne, New
South Wales, and Queensland, Macquarie University, Griffith
University, Queensland University of Technology, La Trobe
University and Charles Darwin University and the Australian
National Data Service (ANDS) are all members of ORCID.
ORCID Working Group of Australia comprising research councils
and associations has developed a consortium model for
implementing ORCID iDs across the Australian research sector. 25
Funding agencies are also keen to partner with ORCID.
Portugal’s Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT)
mandated the use of ORCID in 2013. The National Institutes of
Health (NIH) asks that grantees use ORCID iDs to manage
information in their ScienCV system.
Many other funding agencies across the world have also
adopted ORCID: 26
• The Swedish Research Council (SRC) mandated the use of
ORCID in Spring 2015.
• Austrian Science Fund (FWF) has mandated the use of ORCID
starting in 2016.
• European Commission H2020 Grantee Guidelines recommend
that contributors be uniquely identifiable through identifiers
which are persistent, non-proprietary, open and interoperable
(e.g. through leveraging existing sustainable initiatives such as
ORCID). 27
• Science Foundation Ireland (SFI) will mandate the use of
ORCID in the next funding cycle.
• Autism Speaks, a US-based awareness, advocacy and funding
body, requires all investigators and mentors to register with
ORCID to obtain a unique iD. This enables Autism Speaks to
update one’s funding record and to monitor one’s research
progress. Autism Speaks will not consider applications without
ORCID accounts for the key personnel. 28
Publishing platforms such as Aries Editorial Manager, eJournal
Press, and ScholarOne have already built-in ORCID support so
authors publishing in those journals can create their ORCID iDs
through them. PKP is working on developing modules for the
Open Journal Systems used by more than 8600 journals.
Research information systems such as Elements, Plum
Analytics, PURE, SmartSimple, InfoEd, University Office and
Research Master, and the open access repository platforms DSpace,
Dryad, EPrints, and VIVO have also built-in ORCID support.
Towards the end of 2015, Altmetrics integrated ORCID with
its Explorer apps, and now one can search for Altmetric attention
data for all the research outputs associated with one’s ORCID
profile and thus scholars can get credit for all their research
contributions, including journal articles and participation in social
media.
SUPPORT TO ORCID
Right from the beginning, ORCID’s aim was to become completely
self-sustaining based on member fees. However, they did have
some sponsors and they did take some loans from their own
members/stakeholders (http://orcid.org/about/community/
sponsors).
In September 2011, ORCID received an NSF Eager grant of
US$ 200 000 via the University of Chicago.29 The APIs developed
with this funding and released in November 2011 could be used
by third parties to integrate grant, manuscript or personnel tracking
systems with ORCID. This project led to the formal launch of
ORCID and its website (http://orcid.org). The philosophy and
evolution of ORCID were disseminated through journals such as
Nature and EduCAUSE, outreach meetings and social media
channels such as twitter.
Seeing its value, a few philanthropic foundations came forward
to support ORCID. An award by Alfred P. Sloan Foundation to
ORCID funded the pilot integration of ORCID identifiers by a
group of universities and science and social science professional
associations, such as Purdue University and the Society of
Neurosciences. This programme supported the collaborative
elicitation and documentation of ‘use cases’ and open source
code, and established a collaborative venue for disseminating best
[Downloaded free from http://www.nmji.in on Thursday, October 20, 2016, IP: 202.174.120.125]
e6 THE NATIONAL MEDICAL JOURNAL OF INDIA VOL . 29 , NO . 4 , 2016
practices. All projects were completed in December 2014.
Partnering institutions have shared integration source code and
lessons learnt with the ORCID community through ORCID’s
GitHub open source repository and online ‘use cases’, and now
serve as reference sites for organizations planning similar
integrations. 30
In April 2015, the Leona M. and Harry B. Helmsley Charitable
Trust awarded US$ 3 million to ORCID to develop the infra-
structure and capacity to support international adoption and
technical integration. 31
ORCID IN EMERGING AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
The National Science Library (NSL) of the Chinese Academy of
Sciences (CAS) has taken the lead in China and is taking steps to
adopt ORCID nationwide. 32 China fully recognizes the importance
of the unique author identifiers, especially so for Chinese authors
and the NSL sees the value in an international, open, and researcher-
driven person identifier. Scientists in China are willing to work
with ORCID to promote it in CAS and in the country. To this
purpose, the NSL is enlisting cooperation from Web of Science,
the Chinese Science Citation Database (CSCD), Chinese Social
Science Citation Index (CSSCI), CAS Science, Technology and
Medicine (STM) Journal Association, University STM Journal
Association, and a number of major research and academic
libraries. NSL has developed the iAuthor platform, as an easy
Chinese front gate to register for an ORCID identifier and to
interoperate with Chinese journals, CSCD and others. The NSL
iAuthor service was launched in October 2014. 32
ORCID is yet to pick up in India. As of 15 September 2015,
more than 1.5 million ORCID iDs have been assigned. Of these,
14 439 have been registered with an email address that ends in
‘.in’ and 17 048 records where the country is set to India (email
communication from ORCID, 29 Jun 2015). That comes to
<1.14%. Many authors may be using web mail addresses and we
will not be able to identify them as Indian researchers.
ORCID is just starting in Latin America, according to
Dominique Babini, Open Access Program Coordinator at the
Latin American Council of Social Sciences (CLACSO) (personal
communication, 1 Jan 2016). According to Abel Packer, Director
of SciELO, ‘ORCID is not yet widely adopted in LA. There is an
increasing awareness of it and its role and importance. But, only
a few institutions adopted it as an obligatory policy to their
affiliates’ (personal communication, 2 Jan 2016). Less than 10%
of the authors fill the ORCID field in the submission form in the
online manuscript submission/processing services used by SciELO
Brazil. But, it will be adopted if funding agencies and journals
make it mandatory on their submission systems. A barrier to its
wide adoption is that researchers have many options to manage
their profiles (personal communication, 2 Jan 2016). The first to
join ORCID were: 33 Redalyc, the University of the State of
Mexico’s open access platform; CONCYTEC – National Council
of Science and Technology in Peru; and UNESP (Sao Paulo State
University) in Brazil.
Interest in ORCID has been growing in Africa for some time.
In South Africa alone over 3500 researchers have registered and
three universities, viz. University of Cape Town, Stellenbosch
University, and the Gordon Institute of Business Science are
ORCID members, as is the National Research Foundation. In all
of Africa, there are >7000 registered researchers mostly from
South Africa, Egypt, Nigeria, Tunis, Ghana, Kenya and Botswana.
The cities in Africa that lead in ORCID use are Cairo, Tunis,
Lagos, Algiers, Giza, Cape Town, Pretoria and Alexandria. 34
In the Asia–Pacific region there were 37 members of ORCID 35
as of August 2015, including 13 in Australia, 3 in New Zealand,
6 in Hong Kong, 5 in Taiwan and 4 in Japan. There is one in
India—a multinational company providing editing and publishing
services—with offices in many countries and does not really
qualify to be known exclusively as an Indian entity.
SOME CONCERNS
Some are critical of ORCID. One criticism is that ORCID is not
open access and it appears to be a complicated, expensive,
proprietary and monopolistic system, and the participation of
several commercial publishers makes it a Trojan horse which
could eventually lead to strengthening the stranglehold of the
publishing industry over scholarly communication. We were
alerted to this concern by Thomas Krichel (personal communi-
cation, 6 Jul 2015). Krichel ignores the fact that without the
participation of large bibliographic databases, ORCID cannot
provide the service effectively. Bringing on board Scopus
(Elsevier), Web of Science (Thomson Reuters), etc. is not only a
clever move but is an absolute necessity.
Many others do not agree with this view. Bilder et al. 16 believe
that ORCID conforms to the values of an open scholarly
infrastructure organization. Also, as Paglione 36 has put it: ‘One of
the core principles of ORCID is that all software we develop will
be publicly released under an open source software license
approved by the Open Source Initiative. In addition to transparency,
releasing our code will improve interoperability and integration
with external services, lead to more robust code because more
individuals are auditing and testing it, and, with an extended
developer community, enable faster code iteration and evolution.’
Haak has also listed the open features of ORCID, viz. it provides
free, barrier-free access, it is democratic and transparent, and it is
open access. 37
Another concern is: what if unscrupulous individuals claim
authorship on papers that are not theirs, if the ORCID authorship
has not been previously claimed by the true author? Is there any
safeguard to prevent such a possibility? Can ORCID help prevent
fraudulent reviewing?
In the early days, it is possible for someone to claim authorship
of papers written by others. But, according to Laure Haak (personal
communication, 10 Dec 2015), ‘ORCID is a public resource, and
if someone claims erroneously this can be monitored by the
community and reported and addressed using ORCID’s dispute
procedures (see http://orcid.org/orcid-dispute-procedures). As
universities and other employers of researchers are using ORCID
to assert affiliation (and funders are asserting awardees also using
ORCID), there becomes built a web of trusted data about an
individual’s research activities, all with researcher consent.’
Also, as more and more publishers receive ORCID iDs of authors
as part of the metadata when authors submit papers, and as
Crossref updates the ORCID records, it will reduce unethical
claims.
As far as peer-review fraud is concerned, there are attempts to
counter it using ORCID.38 But, these are social problems and
technical solutions are not the answer. The fight between good
and evil is often a see-saw. However, as the uptake of ORCID
gains momentum it will become difficult for such fraudsters to lay
claim on others’ works.
There are some reservations though about the costs involved in
becoming a member of ORCID. Here is what J.K. Vijayakumar of
King Abdullah University, Saudi Arabia, told us: ‘if an institution
wants to use ORCID to integrate with their repository, research
[Downloaded free from http://www.nmji.in on Thursday, October 20, 2016, IP: 202.174.120.125]
SPEAKING FOR OURSELVES e7
management systems, etc., the institution needs to become a
member (the fees are high and one has to pay even more if ORCID
integration is required for more than one system). This needs to be
debated and ORCID should bring down the membership fee
according to income of the country, so that developing nations can
also take part’ (personal communication, 11 Jul 2015). This seems
to be a good suggestion. In fact, a member can use one member
API credential in many systems. ORCID also provides a substantial
discount for small organizations (<US$ 200 000). In addition,
affordability is partly why the consortium member model was
launched. Haak says: ‘We continue to evaluate membership fees
and are starting an initiative for adoption in developing countries
in 2016’ (personal communication, 2015).
What we are concerned more is the fact that although the
number of live ORCID iDs exceed 2.43 million (as of 29 July
2016), only about 337 000 of them have at least one work
(https://orcid.org/statistics). Only about one in five iDs is actually
being used.
DISCUSSION
The value of ORCID is evident even in its first 5 years. As
Jonathon Kram of the Strategic Planning and Policy Unit at
Wellcome Trust says, ‘the ability to uniquely identify contributors
is a deceptively simple concept which, if realized, could enable
forms of real-time understanding of scientific research that up to
now have been extremely costly (if not impossible).’ 39
When the Modern Language Association (MLA) enabled in
June 2015 retroactive assigning of ORCID iDs to the nearly two
million records in its International Bibliography, which holds the
key to language and literary scholarship for more than 90 years, it
met an especially critical need in the humanities and arts, where
publication types and venues are so diverse, needing more work
to be done to create clarity and connect the parts than in the
sciences. It would also bring increased recognition and validation
of humanities scholarship. 40
As early as 2012, concerned by the lack of quality,
comprehensive data about biomedical researchers, the US NIH
recommended the development of a simple, comprehensive
tracking system for trainees, and implemented a researcher profile
system called the Science Experts Network Curriculum Vitae
(SciENcv), and encouraged the adoption of unique, persistent
ORCID identifiers for researchers. 41
ORCID, along with open access and open educational resources,
is integral to the open knowledge movement. It supports ‘the
transition from science to e-Science, wherein scholarly publications
can be mined to spot links and ideas hidden in the ever-growing
volume of scholarly literature’. 42
Such benefits of ORCID adoption will be fully realized only if
ORCID iDs are adopted widely across the research community,
and if ORCID iDs are integrated within systems of higher
educational institutions, funders and publishers. 43
If research councils such as the Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research (CSIR), Indian Council of Agricultural
Research (ICAR), and Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)
and funding agencies such as the Department of Science and
Technology (DST), Department of Biotechnology (DBT) and the
University Grants Commission (UGC) mandate ORCID iDs for
all researchers in all their laboratories and for all applicants for
grants, India can make quick progress. Vice chancellors of
universities, directors of research institutions, and the governing
boards of academies and professional associations and societies
could insist on all researchers in their respective institutions
registering for an ORCID iD. Scholarly journals published by the
science academies, CSIR-NISCAIR, ICAR, ICMR, professional
associations, etc. could mandate inclusion of ORCID iDs by all
authors at the time of submitting manuscripts. It would help
immensely if India were to adopt a manpower tracking system
based on ORCID in all areas of science, technology and innovation,
similar to that used by NIH.
India has done reasonably well in the area of open educational
resources (OER). In particular, the National Programme of
Technology Enabled Learning (NPTEL) executed by a consortium
of IITs and Indian Institute of Science is highly regarded and is
used well. But it took several years of voluntary effort before
green open access became acceptable to a small percent of Indian
researchers and research institutions, long after it became standard
practice in many countries. We hope this time around things will
move quickly and many researchers and institutions will adopt
ORCID soon.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to Dr L.L. Haak, Alice Meadows, Nobuko Miyairi and
Alainna Wrigley of ORCID, Rachel Bruce of Jisc, Thomas Krichel of GESIS
and RePEc, Peter Suber of the Harvard Berkman Center for Internet &
Society, Martin Fenner of DataCite, Arthur Sale of University of Tasmania,
John Willinsky of Stanford University, Dominique Babini of CLACSO, Abel
Packer of SciELO, for answering our questions and providing some valuable
information. We are indebted to Subbiah Gunasekaran of the Central
Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi, for valuable discussion and
for alerting us to some important developments. The comments of two
referees were very helpful in rewriting and improving the original text.
REFERENCES
1 Garfield E. British quest for uniqueness versus American egocentrism. Nature
1969;223:763.
2 Garfield E. What is in a surname? Current Contents 1981;5:26–30.
3 Qiu J. Scientific publishing: Identity crisis. Nature 2008; 451:766–67.
4 Sprouse GD. Which Wei Wang? Phys Rev Lett 2007:99.
5 Calamur K. The 19th-century Japanese law on last names, The Atlantic Dec 2015.
Available at www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2015/12/japan-last-name/
420711 (accessed on 3 Jan 2016).
6 Sharma K, The other half: What’s in a name? The Hindu 7 Aug 2010. Available at
http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/columns/Kalpana_Sharma/the-other-half-whats-
in-a-name/article196918.ece (accessed on 3 Jan 2016).
7 Canese K. PubMed and computed author sorted display. NLM Tech Bull 2012;386:e2.
8 Medows A. ORCID Blog 23 Jun 2015. Available at https://orcid.org/blog/2015/06/
23/national-consortium-orcid-set-improve-uk-research-visibility-and-collaboration
(accessed on 29 Sep 2015).
9 Fenner M. Author identifier overview. PLOS Blogs: Gobbledygook 2011. Available
at http://blogs.plos.org/mfenner/author-identifier-overview/ (accessed on 29 Sep
2015).
10 Wilson B, Fenner M. Open researcher & contributor ID (ORCID): Solving the name
ambiguity problem. EDUCAUSE Rev 2012;47(3):54–5.
11 University of Southampton. Southampton ORCID––FAQs and Support.
LibGuides@Southampton 2015. Available at http://library.soton.ac.uk/orcid
(accessed on 29 Sep 2015).
12 Hendricks G. Crossref to auto-update ORCID records. Available at http://crosstech.
crossref.org/2015/09/orcid-auto-update.html (accessed on 29 Sep 2015).
13 Anstey A. How can we be certain who authors really are? Why ORCID is important
to the British Journal of Dermatology. Br J Dermatol 2014;171:679–80.
14 ORCID. Link works to your ORCID record from another system. Available at
http://support.orcid.org/knowledgebase/articles/188278-import-works-website-user
(accessed on 29 Sep 2015).
15 ORCID. Import works from BibTeX files: Website user. Available at http://
support.orcid.org/knowledgebase/articles/390530 (accessed on 29 Sep 2015).
16 Bilder G, Lin J, Neylon C. Principles for open scholarly infrastructure-v1. Available
at http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.1314859 (accessed on 29 Sep 2015).
17 Bryant R. ORCID outreach activities in Latin America, 2013. Available at http://
orcid.org/blog/2013/09/10/orcid-outreach-activities-latin-america (accessed on 29
Sep 2015).
18 Joint Information Systems Committee (Jisc). National consortium for ORCID set to
improve UK research visibility and collaboration. 2015. Available at www.jisc.ac.uk/
news/national-consortium-for-orcid-set-to-improve-uk-research-visibility-and-
collaboration-23-jun (accessed on 29 Sep 2015).
19 Joint Information Systems Committee (Jisc). Jisc-ARMA ORCID Pilot Project.
[Downloaded free from http://www.nmji.in on Thursday, October 20, 2016, IP: 202.174.120.125]
e8 THE NATIONAL MEDICAL JOURNAL OF INDIA VOL . 29 , NO . 4 , 2016
Available at http://orcidpilot.jiscinvolve.org/wp/hei-based-projects/ (accessed on 3
Jan 2016).
20 Reimer T. UK ORCID members meeting and launch of Jisc ORCID consortium at
Imperial College, London, 28 September 2015, Available at http://
wwwf.imperial.ac.uk/blog/openaccess/2015/10/07/uk-orcid-members-meeting-and-
launch-of-jisc-orcid-consortium-at-imperial-college-london-28th-september-2015/
(accessed on 3 Jan 2016).
21 Wellcome Trust. Who are you? Recognising researchers with ORCID identifiers, 30
Jun 2015. Available at http://blog.wellcome.ac.uk/2015/06/30/who-are-you-
recognising-researchers-with-orcid-identifiers/ (accessed on 29 Sep 2015).
22 National Institute for Health Research. NIHR begins roll out of mandatory ORCID
iD requirement, 23 September 2015. Available at www.nihr.ac.uk/newsroom/featured-
news/nihr-begins-roll-out-of-mandatory-orcid-id-requirement/3024 (accessed on
3 Jan 2016).
23 Meadows A. Italy launches national ORCID implementation, 22 June 2015. Available
at http://orcid.org/blog/2015/06/19/italy-launches-national-orcid-implementation
(accessed on 3 Jan 2016).
24 Ferguson N. Research identifiers: National approaches to ORCID and ISNI
implementation, July 2015. Available at https://repository.jisc.ac.uk/6181/1/KE-
report-national-approaches-to-ORCID-and-ISNI.pdf (accessed on 29 Sep 2015).
25 Meadows A. Australian ORCID consortium officially launched. 16 February 2016.
Available at https://orcid.org/blog/2016/02/19/australian-orcid-consortium-
officially-launched (accessed on 20 Feb 2016).
26 Haak L. Adoption and use by the research community: Focus on funders. 2015.
Available at http://slideshare.net/ORCIDslides/orcid_adoption_and_use (accessed
on 29 Sep 2015).
27 European Commission. Directorate General for Research & Innovation. Guidelines
on open access to scientific publications and research data in Horizon 2020:
Version 1.0. 2013. Available at http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ref/
h2020/grants_manual/hi/oa_pilot/h2020-hi-oa-pilot-guide_en.pdf (accessed on 29
Sep 2015).
28 Autism Speaks. Policy on ORCID integration with Autism Speaks science grants
system, Available at www.autismspeaks.org/science/policy-statements/policy-
ORCID-integration-autism-speaks-science-grants-system (accessed on 3 Jan 2016).
29 Ratner H. ORCID: Getting to launch. 2012. Available at www.slideshare.net/
ORCIDSlides/2-ratner-orcid-getting-to-launch-v5 (slide No. 22) (accessed on 29
Sep 2015).
30 ORCID. Adoption and integration program. Available at http://orcid.org/content/
adoption-and-integration-program (accessed on 29 Sep 2015).
31 ORCID receives $3 million grant to build international engagement. Available at
http://helmsleytrust.org/news/orcid-receives-3-million-grant-build-international-
engagement (accessed on 29 Sep 2015).
32 Haak L. ORCID Blog. Available at https://orcid.org/blog/2014/12/03/iauthor-and-
orcid-supporting-international-identifiers-chinese-researchers-national (accessed
on 29 Sep 2015).
33 Pessoa L. ORCID Blog. Available at https://orcid.org/blog/2015/08/20/orcid-
growing-latin-america (accessed on 29 Sep 2015).
34 Buys M. ORCID in Southern Africa. 2015. Available at http://orcid.org/blog/2015/
05/14/orcid-research-management-south-africa (accessed on 29 Sep 2015).
35 Miyairi N. ORCID: Building academic trust. Panel discussion on reputation
management and research integrity, STM Publishing and China Industry Day,
Beijing, 25 August 2015. Available at www.stm-assoc.org/
2015_08_25_STM_CAST_Miyairi_ORCID_Industry_Day.pdf (accessed on 29 Sep
2015).
36 Paglione L. ORCID Blog. Available at http://orcid.org/blog/2013/02/21/orcid-
open-source (accessed on 29 Sep 2015).
37 Haak L. ORCID Blog. Available at http://orcid.org/content/o-orcid (accessed on 29
Sep 2015).
38 Ferguson C, Marcus A, Oransky I. Publishing: The peer-review scam. Nature
2014;515:480–2.
39 Kram J. ORCID Blog. Available at https://orcid.org/blog/2015/06/26/host-reasons-
why-funders-should-be-investing-orcid-%E2%80%A6 (accessed on 3 Jan 2016).
40 Taylor LN. MLA (Modern Language Association) International Bibliography launches
ORCID App. 2015 Available at http://laurientaylor.org/2015/06/19/news-mla-
modern-language-association-international-bibliography-launches-orcid-app/
(accessed on 3 Jan 2016).
41 Schaffer W. The adoption of ORCID identifiers by funding organizations. Available
at www.slideshare.net/ORCIDSlides/20140423-webinar-schaffer (accessed on 3
Jan 2016).
42 Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE). Metrics cannot replace
peer review in the next REF. Available at www.hefce.ac.uk/news/newsarchive/2015/
Name,104464,en.html (accessed on 3 Jan 2016).
43 Research Councils UK (RCUK) Administrator. We’re now a member of ORCID.
Available at http://blogs.rcuk.ac.uk/2015/12/03/were-now-a-member-of-orcid/
(accessed on 3 Jan 2016).
[Downloaded free from http://www.nmji.in on Thursday, October 20, 2016, IP: 202.174.120.125]